Changing JARM references to JWT directly (Issue #463) (#477)
openid/OpenID4VP: openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.md

W3C Verifiable Credential:
: A Verifiable Credential compliant to the [@VC_DATA] specification.

> W3C Verifiable Presentation:    * `authorization_encrypted_response_enc`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] enc algorithm REQUIRED for encrypting authorization responses. If authorization_encrypted_response_alg is specified, the default for this value is A128CBC-HS256. When authorization_encrypted_response_enc is included, authorization_encrypted_response_alg MUST also be provided.
> 
>     Note: The encryption parameters `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` and `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` from [@!JARM] are reused to avoid redefining them. They are intended to be used for an unsigned, encrypted response (see (#response_encryption)). As signing is unnecessary, the mechanism specified in [@!JARM] do not apply.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
W3C Verifiable Presentation:
```
is this a copy paste error?

`client_metadata`:
: OPTIONAL. A JSON object containing the Verifier metadata values. It MUST be UTF-8 encoded. The following metadata parameters MAY be used:

    * `jwks`: OPTIONAL. A JWKS as defined in [@!RFC7591]. It MAY contain one or more public keys, such as those used by the Wallet as an input to a key agreement that may be used for encryption of the Authorization Response (see (#response_encryption)), or where the Wallet will require the public key of the Verifier to generate the Verifiable Presentation. This allows the Verifier to pass ephemeral keys specific to this Authorization Request. Public keys included in this parameter MUST NOT be used to verify the signature of signed Authorization Requests.
    * `vp_formats`: REQUIRED when not available to the Wallet via another mechanism. As defined in (#client_metadata_parameters).

>     * `authorization_encrypted_response_enc`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] enc algorithm REQUIRED for encrypting authorization responses. When a `response_mode` requiring encryption of the Authorization Response (such as `dc_api.jwt` or `direct_post.jwt`) is specified this MUST be present. Otherwise this should be absent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * `authorization_encrypted_response_enc`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] enc algorithm is REQUIRED for encrypting authorization responses. When a `response_mode` requiring encryption of the Authorization Response (such as `dc_api.jwt` or `direct_post.jwt`) is specified this MUST be present. Otherwise this SHOULD be absent.
```

> Note: Since the response is encrypted (see (#response_encryption)), but not signed, the mechanism specified in [@!JARM] does not apply. However, the  `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` metadata parameter from [@!JARM] is reused to avoid redefining it.```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Since the response is encrypted (see (#response_encryption)), but not signed, the mechanism to sign, encrypt, or both sign and encrypt the Authorization Response specified in [@!JARM] does not apply. However, the  `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` metadata parameter from [@!JARM] is reused to avoid redefining it.```
```

`client_metadata`:
: OPTIONAL. A JSON object containing the Verifier metadata values. It MUST be UTF-8 encoded. The following metadata parameters MAY be used:

    * `jwks`: OPTIONAL. A JWKS as defined in [@!RFC7591]. It MAY contain one or more public keys, such as those used by the Wallet as an input to a key agreement that may be used for encryption of the Authorization Response (see (#response_encryption)), or where the Wallet will require the public key of the Verifier to generate the Verifiable Presentation. This allows the Verifier to pass ephemeral keys specific to this Authorization Request. Public keys included in this parameter MUST NOT be used to verify the signature of signed Authorization Requests.
    * `vp_formats`: REQUIRED when not available to the Wallet via another mechanism. As defined in (#client_metadata_parameters).

>     * `authorization_encrypted_response_alg`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] algorithm for encrypting authorization responses. See (#response_encryption) for usage. The default, if omitted, is that no encryption is performed.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't the `response_mode` orchestrate whether encryption should be performed? If `dc_api.jwt` and there is no `alg`, then this is a error case. Same if the `jwks` does not contain a suitable encryption key.
```suggestion
    * `authorization_encrypted_response_alg`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] algorithm for encrypting authorization responses. See (#response_encryption) for usage.
```

Reviewer 4: > Shouldn't the `response_mode` orchestrate whether encryption should be performed? If `dc_api.jwt` and there is no `alg`, then this is a error case. Same if the `jwks` does not contain a suitable encryption key.

Totally agree @awoie

When `response_mode` requires encryption (`*.jwt`) then there should be  
- `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` (default or explicit)
- `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` (default or explicit)
- `jwks` should contain at least one suitable encryption key
- wallet should support all the above.

If any of the above conditions is not met then an error should be raised (It would be difficult though to communicated it back to the verifier) 

I believe the same goes, for the opposite case

When `response_mode` doesn't require encryption then
- `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` should be absent 
- `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` should be absent
- `jwks` should be absent or empty

PS: To be frank, I don't find so useful the defaults  (when an explicit value is not provided)

>     * `authorization_encrypted_response_alg`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] algorithm for encrypting authorization responses. See (#response_encryption) for usage. The default, if omitted, is that no encryption is performed.

Reviewer 5: > Shouldn't the response_mode orchestrate whether encryption should be performed? 

I'd think so, yes. And I'd further suggest that `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` shouldn't be used at all with this change. The response_mode and public keys in the jwks have the necessary info. In fact doesn't the use of `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` preculde the utiltiy of providing more than one key in the jwks to give the wallet options for encryption alg?

Reviewer 3: Would you then require the `alg` value to be present in the JWK, e.g., `ECDH-ES`, and then just mandate a specific encryption algorithm, e.g., `A128GCM`?

Reviewer 5: > Would you then require the `alg` value to be present in the JWK, e.g., `ECDH-ES`,

I wasn't thinking of going so far as requiring it but I suppose that could be done. Or at least mention it.

> and then just mandate a specific encryption algorithm, e.g., `A128GCM`?

using authorization_encrypted_response_enc with a reasonable default seems okay to me

Author: Agree this approach is better, was minimizing changes but this plus clearer language makes sense, will give a pass at updating the text.

>     * `authorization_encrypted_response_enc`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] encryption algorithm for encrypting authorization responses. If `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` is specified, the default for this value is A128CBC-HS256. When `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` is included, `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` MUST also be provided.

Reviewer 3: Any reason to choose A128CBC-HS256 over A128GCM? We are using A128GCM already in HAIP and it is more modern, faster, and robust (when implemented correctly).
```suggestion
    * `authorization_encrypted_response_enc`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] encryption algorithm for encrypting authorization responses. If `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` is specified, the default for this value is `A256GCM`. When `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` is included, `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` MUST also be provided.
```

Author: Default purely came from JARM spec (so unchanged from the existing spec just repeated here for clarity.) I prefer babisRoutis's approach and mandate a value be specified, when there is no clear 'best' default, and will update to do that.

> Note: Since the response is encrypted (see (#response_encryption)), but not signed, the mechanism specified in [@!JARM] does not apply. However, `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` and `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` metadata parameters from [@!JARM] are reused to avoid redefining them. ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note: Since the response is encrypted (see (#response_encryption)), but not signed, the mechanism specified in [@!JARM] does not apply. However, `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` and `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` metadata parameters from [@!JARM] are reused to avoid redefining them.```
```

`client_metadata`:
: OPTIONAL. A JSON object containing the Verifier metadata values. It MUST be UTF-8 encoded. The following metadata parameters MAY be used:

    * `jwks`: OPTIONAL. A JWKS as defined in [@!RFC7591]. It MAY contain one or more public keys, such as those used by the Wallet as an input to a key agreement that may be used for encryption of the Authorization Response (see (#response_encryption)), or where the Wallet will require the public key of the Verifier to generate the Verifiable Presentation. This allows the Verifier to pass ephemeral keys specific to this Authorization Request. Public keys included in this parameter MUST NOT be used to verify the signature of signed Authorization Requests.
    * `vp_formats`: REQUIRED when not available to the Wallet via another mechanism. As defined in (#client_metadata_parameters).
    * `authorization_encrypted_response_alg`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM].

>     * `authorization_encrypted_response_enc`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM].

Reviewer: I agree it reads much cleaner without references to JARM. the only remaining awkward part is probably these two metadata parameters that are defined by JARM. a small note why we still use them might be helpful?

Reviewer 6: I was wondering about the same - a small note that this mechanism originated from JARM but doesn't use the signing part might make sense?

Author: Makes sense: I've updated to add a note on both how to use within this spec and explicitly say that JARM doesn't apply. Also included the definition text from JARM (to make reading it a bit clearer).

`client_metadata`:
: OPTIONAL. A JSON object containing the Verifier metadata values. It MUST be UTF-8 encoded. The following metadata parameters MAY be used:

    * `jwks`: OPTIONAL. A JWKS as defined in [@!RFC7591]. It MAY contain one or more public keys, such as those used by the Wallet as an input to a key agreement that may be used for encryption of the Authorization Response (see (#response_encryption)), or where the Wallet will require the public key of the Verifier to generate the Verifiable Presentation. This allows the Verifier to pass ephemeral keys specific to this Authorization Request. Public keys included in this parameter MUST NOT be used to verify the signature of signed Authorization Requests.
    * `vp_formats`: REQUIRED when not available to the Wallet via another mechanism. As defined in (#client_metadata_parameters).

>     * `authorization_encrypted_response_alg`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] alg algorithm REQUIRED for encrypting authorization responses. See (#response_encyption) for usage. The default, if omitted, is that no encryption is performed.

Author: applied manually

>     * `authorization_encrypted_response_alg`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] alg algorithm REQUIRED for encrypting authorization responses. See (#response_encyption) for usage. The default, if omitted, is that no encryption is performed.
>     * `authorization_encrypted_response_enc`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] enc algorithm REQUIRED for encrypting authorization responses. If authorization_encrypted_response_alg is specified, the default for this value is A128CBC-HS256. When authorization_encrypted_response_enc is included, authorization_encrypted_response_alg MUST also be provided.
> 
>     Note: The encryption parameters `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` and `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` from [@!JARM] are reused to avoid redefining them. They are intended to be used for an unsigned, encrypted response (see (#response_encryption)). As signing is unnecessary, the mechanism specified in [@!JARM] do not apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `authorization_encrypted_response_alg`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] algorithm for encrypting authorization responses. See (#response_encyption) for usage. The default, if omitted, is that no encryption is performed.
    * `authorization_encrypted_response_enc`: OPTIONAL. As defined in [@!JARM]. The JWE [@!RFC7516] encryption algorithm for encrypting authorization responses. If `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` is specified, the default for this value is A128CBC-HS256. When `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` is included, `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` MUST also be provided.

Note: Since the response is encrypted (see (#response_encryption)), but not signed, the mechanism specified in [@!JARM] does not apply. However, `authorization_encrypted_response_alg` and `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` metadata parameters from [@!JARM] are reused to avoid redefining them. ```

: OPTIONAL. Defined in [@!RFC6749]. The Wallet MAY allow Verifiers to request presentation of Verifiable Credentials by utilizing a pre-defined scope value. See (#request_scope) for more details.

`response_mode`:

> : REQUIRED. Defined in [@!OAuth.Responses]. This parameter is used (through the new Response Mode `direct_post`) to ask the Wallet to send the response to the Verifier via an HTTPS connection (see (#response_mode_post) for more details). It is also used to request encrypting (see (#response_encryption) for more details). 

Reviewer: but those are two uses that are both required. so i think `it is also used` is beter. "to request encrypting" is not an optional use of this parameter, right?

Additional parameters MAY be defined and used in the response from the Response Endpoint to the Wallet.
The Wallet MUST ignore any unrecognized parameters.

## Encrypted Responses {#response_encryption}

> This section defines how an Authorization Response containing a VP Token can be encrypted at the application level when the Response Type value is `vp_token` or `vp_token id_token`. Encrypting the Authorization Response can prevent personal data in the Authorization Response from leaking, when the Authorization Response is returned through the front channel (e.g., the browser). For security considerations see (#encrypting_unsigned_response).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section defines how an Authorization Response containing a VP Token can be encrypted at the application level when the Response Type value is `vp_token` or `vp_token id_token`. Encrypting the Authorization Response can, for example, prevent personal data in the Authorization Response from leaking. For security considerations see (#encrypting_unsigned_response).
```
yeah i think that's ok. 

@martijnharing could you also please take a look at privacy considerations Nat has drafted in https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/24#issuecomment-2779356349

> To encrypt the Authorization Response, implementations MUST use an unsigned, encrypted JWT as described in [@!RFC7519]. The `enc` algorithm used MUST be obtained from `authorization_encrypted_response_enc` claim within the `client_metadata`. The `alg` algorithm used MUST be the `alg` value of the chosen `jwk`.

Reviewer 2: I think the last sentence is not clear enough, we mean a key from the `jwks` claim within `client_metadata` as written in the next section?

Reviewer 2: "the chosen `jwk`" is not easy to understand, as it has not been mentioned before I believe

Reviewer 5: I think this all touches on clarifications I (was) volunteered to make yesterday kinda per https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/pull/477#discussion_r2031613035 but I'll definitely try to address this kind of point. Hopefully a bit later today.

> The Verifier's public key for input into the key agreement MUST be obtained from the `jwks` claim within the `client_metadata` request parameter, within the metadata defined in the Entity Configuration when [@!OpenID.Federation] is used, or other mechanisms. The Wallet MAY select any key for which encryption is a valid operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Verifier's public key for input into the key agreement SHOULD be obtained from the `jwks` claim within the `client_metadata` request parameter, within the metadata defined in the Entity Configuration when [@!OpenID.Federation] is used, or other mechanisms. The Wallet MAY select any key for which encryption is a valid operation.
```
sgtm

Note that for the ECDH JWE algorithms (from section 4.6 of [@!RFC7518]), the `apu` and `apv` values are inputs
into the key derivation process that is used to derive the content encryption key. Regardless of algorithm used, the values are always part of the AEAD tag computation so will still be bound to the encrypted response.
The following is a non-normative example of the payload of a JWT used in an Authorization Response that is encrypted and not signed:

<{{examples/response/jarm_jwt_enc_only_vc_json_body.json}}

The payload secured by the encrypted JWT response MUST include the contents in the response as defined in (#response-parameters).

Note: For encryption, implementers have a variety of options available through JOSE, including the use of Hybrid Public Key Encryption (HPKE) as detailed in [@I-D.ietf-jose-hpke-encrypt]. 

### Response Mode "direct_post.jwt" {#direct_post_jwt}

This specification also defines a new Response Mode `direct_post.jwt`, which allows for encryption to be used with Response Mode `direct_post` defined in (#response_mode_post).

> The Response Mode `direct_post.jwt` causes the Wallet to send the Authorization Response using an HTTP POST request instead of redirecting back to the Verifier as defined in (#response_mode_post). The Wallet adds the `response` parameter containing the JWT as defined in (#response_encryption) in the body of an HTTP POST request using the `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` content type. The names and values in the body MUST be encoded using UTF-8.

Reviewer: yeah, this section https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VP/openid-4-verifiable-presentations-wg-draft.html#appendix-A.4, right? 
(this comment is probably out of scope of this PR)

If a Wallet is unable to generate an encrypted response, it MAY send an error response as per (#response_mode_post).

> The following is a non-normative example of a response using the `presentation_submission` and `vp_token` values from (#jwt_vc). (line breaks for display purposes only):

Reviewer 5: a "direct_post.jwt" example of a response using the `presentation_submission` and `vp_token` values... with PE having gone away and this having been a JWS rather than JWE... and merge conflicts but not here. I'm not sure I have the skills to make the mostly agreed on changes in the context of this PR. Might have to start a new one borrowing from Gareth's work as reference.

<{{examples/response/jarm_jwt_vc_json_post.txt}}

> The following is a non-normative example of the payload of the JWT used in the example above before base64url encoding and encrypting:

Reviewer 5: to my eye, an order of operations was implied here and with the change from signing to encrypting it's not right anymore 

```suggestion
The following is a non-normative example of the payload of the JWT used in the example above before encrypting and base64url encoding:
```

The `client_id` parameter MUST be present in signed requests defined in (#signed_request), as it communicates to the wallet which Client Identifier Scheme and Client Identifier to use when authenticating the client through verification of the request signature or retrieving client metadata.

> The value of the `response_mode` parameter MUST be `dc_api` when the response is neither signed nor encrypted and `dc_api.jwt` when the response is encrypted as defined in (#response_encryption).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The value of the `response_mode` parameter MUST be `dc_api` when the response is not encrypted and `dc_api.jwt` when the response is encrypted as defined in (#response_encryption).
```

   * clarify that `dcql_query` and `presentation_definition` are passed as JSON objects (not strings) in request objects
   * support returning multiple presentations for a single dcql credential query when requested using `multiple`
   * Added support for multiple Client Identifiers and corresponding Request Signature to the DC API profile

>    * remove JARM and response signing, using JWT directly for unsigned, encrypted responses.

Reviewer: i can move this to -26 in #497 or you can do it here
